We frequently want to check if two values in Haskell are equal, but we only want to compare two values **of the same type** for equality. It does not make any sense to ask whether, e.g., a Boolean is equal to a character.

We would hence be tempted to write a **polymorphic function**
```haskell
(==) : a -> a -> Bool
```
However, it is not always possible to decide if two values of a given type are equal.

For example, consider `Integer -> Bool`:
```haskell
(==) :: (Integer -> Bool) -> (Integer -> Bool) -> Bool
```
Given that `f, g :: Integer -> Bool`, we would like `f == g` to be $\forall$`x :: Integer, f x == g x`, but `Integer` has infinitely many values, so it is impossible to verify that `f == g`.

So since we cannot always decide that two values are equal, yet we still want a `(==)` function, we must enforce some restriction upon the function. A **type class** is an interface for a set of operations on a type. An **instance** is a type for which the interface has been implemented.

*(An **interface** sets the expectations for what an object should be capable of, providing a common structure for different objects to follow while allowing them to have their unique implementations of those capabilities.)* 

We have `(==) :: Eq a => a -> a -> Bool`, where `Eq` is a `Eq` is a type class in Haskell that defines operations for equality comparison. For any instance `a`, we have `(==) :: a -> a -> Bool`, but only for those types `a`, not for any arbitrary type. The restriction is indicated by the **class constraint** in the type annotation (before `=>`). `Eq a` is a type class constraint. It means that whatever type `a` represents, it must be an instance of the `Eq` type class. In other words, `a` can only be replaced with data types that support equality comparison, as defined by the `Eq` type class.
## The type class `Eq`
We can obtain information about the type class `Eq` (or any for that matter) by using `Prelude> :info Eq`:
```haskell
Prelude> :info Eq
class Eq a where
  (==) :: a -> a -> Bool
  (/=) :: a -> a -> Bool
  {-# MINIMAL (==) | (/=) #-}
  	-- Defined in ‘GHC.Classes’
instance (Eq a, Eq b) => Eq (Either a b)
  -- Defined in ‘Data.Either’
instance Eq a => Eq [a] -- Defined in ‘GHC.Classes’
instance Eq Word -- Defined in ‘GHC.Classes’
instance Eq Ordering -- Defined in ‘GHC.Classes’
instance Eq Int -- Defined in ‘GHC.Classes’
instance Eq Float -- Defined in ‘GHC.Classes’
instance Eq Double -- Defined in ‘GHC.Classes’
instance Eq Char -- Defined in ‘GHC.Classes’
instance Eq Bool -- Defined in ‘GHC.Classes’
...
instance (Eq a, Eq b, Eq c) => Eq (a, b, c)
  -- Defined in ‘GHC.Classes’
instance (Eq a, Eq b) => Eq (a, b) -- Defined in ‘GHC.Classes’
instance Eq () -- Defined in ‘GHC.Classes’
instance Eq Integer
  -- Defined in ‘integer-gmp-1.0.2.0:GHC.Integer.Type’
instance Eq a => Eq (Maybe a) -- Defined in ‘GHC.Base’
```

This tells us the following:
- The type class `Eq` provides two functions, `(==)` and `(/=)`.
- To implement the type class on a type `a`, we have to implement at least one of `(==) :: a -> a -> Bool` or `(/=) :: a -> a -> Bool`.
- Many instances of `Eq` are implemented, e.g., for `Word`, `Ordering`, `Int`,... 
- Furthermore, we have **derived** instances:
   1. If types `a` and `b` are instances, then the type `(a,b)` of pairs of values in `a` and `b` is also an instance.
   2. Similarly, if `a` is an instance of `Eq`, so is the type `[a]` of lists of values in `a`.

Further information that is **not** printed above:
- When only one of `(==)` and `(/=)` is provided by the user when implementing the instance, the other is defined automatically as its **negation**, for example `x /= y = not (x == y)`.
- The information does not say what the implementation of `(==)` is for any of the instances. This requires looking at the source code.

## Summary
* A `class` in Haskell is like an `interface` in Java. (*Both in Haskell and Java, classes and interfaces are used to define abstractions and structure code in a way that promotes code reusability and maintainability. They both define a set of functions or methods that can be implemented by types or classes that inherit from or implement them*.)
* We implement a `class` in Haskell using the keyword `instance`.
* Only types that are introduced using `data` or `newtype` can be made instances of classes (although GHC has some extensions to get around this...).
* It is only possible to declare a **single** instance of a class for any given `data` type or `newtype` (although GHC has some extensions to get around this...).
* In a function type, everything before `=>` is a **class constraint**: the function is only available for such types that are an instance of the mentioned classes.