#### Odds vs Probability
Odds are different from probability, to demonstrate, let's say an event has a $p$ (probability) = 0.2, or 20%, chance of occurring. The odds for this are the ratio of the probabilities of the event happening, and not happening, like so: 0.2 / (1-0.2) = 0.25. We take these odds and apply a logarithm: $logit(p) = log(\frac{p}{1-p}) = log(p) - log(1-p) = -log(\frac{1}{p}-1)$ 

Consider a model with *n* independent variables $x_1$ to $x_n$ and one dependent variable, *Y*, which is a random variable that follows the Bernoulli distribution, which is denoted as $p = P(Y=1)$. The logistic model can be formally defined as:

$logit = log (\frac{p}{1-p}) = \theta_0 + \theta_1 x_1 + \theta_2 x_2 + ... + + \theta_n x_n$

(where the $\theta$'s are the coefficients / parameters of this logistic model, which we infer/learn from the data)
#### Math Example Results Interpretation:
After implementing the logistic regression model on the dataset with our Python Scikit Learn, we obtain the model's intercept, $\theta_0: -1.2725$ and the model coefficients $\theta_1: 0.2064$.

Now, we calculate the odds: 
$odds = \frac{p}{1 - p} = exp(\theta_0 + \theta_1x1) = exp(-1.2725 + 0.2064x1) = exp(0.2064 \cdot (-6.1652 + x1))$

As well as the probability:
$P(Y = 1) = \frac{1}{1 + exp(-(\theta_0 + \theta_1x1))} = \frac{1}{1 + exp(-0.2064 \cdot (-6.1652 + x1))}$ 

Interpreting these results, the intercept tells us the log-odds of passing the math exam if no hours were spent studying. From the equations above, we find that the odds were 0.28, or roughly 1 to 3, and the probability of passing was 0.22 with zero study hours.

Additionally, the equation tells us that if we were to increase our study time by an hour, we would increase the odds of passing the exam by $exp(\theta_1) = exp(0.2064) \approx 1.2292$. To just pass the exam, i.e., even odds or a probability of 1/2, we need to study at least $- \frac{\theta_0}{\theta_1} = 6.1652$ hours.

Given a certain number of hours a student studied, we can also predict the probability the student will pass the exam. For example, a student who studies 10 hours has a probability $P(Y = 1) = \frac{1}{1 + exp(-0.2064 \cdot (-6.1652 + 10))} = 0.6881$ of passing.
#### Main Assumptions of Logistic Regression:
1. Binary outcomes: The input patterns are divided into two categories/classes.
2. Independent observations: Observations should come from independent chronicles, not from repeated measurements or matched data.
3. Low or no multicollinearity among the independent variables: The variables should not be too highly correlated with each other.
4. Linearity of independent variables and log-odds: Logistic regression assumes that the relationship between the logarithm of the odds and the independent variables is linear.
5. Large sample size: To obtain reliable and stable estimates of parameters, a large sample size is preferable.
6. Rule of ten: We need at least 10 cases with the least frequent outcome for each independent variable in our model. For example, if we have 5 independent variables and the expected probability of our least frequent outcome is 0.10, then we would need a minimum sample size of 500 (10 * 5 / 0.10).