Data structures efficiently organise data (think linked lists, arrays)

Algorithms manipulate data structures (think recitlinear shape solving algo, prims)

This module covers the two above topics and the time / space complexity of DS/Algo pairs

__Abstract Data Types__

A type is a set of possible values, with a set of allowed operations on those values
	- eg string, int
	
An abstract data type (ADT) is a type where only behavior is defined but not implementation. The internal representation is hidden to user.
	- eg `Array, List, Map, Queue, Set, Stack, Table, Tree, and Vector` are ADTs. These ADT's each have different operations, but could have a CDT implentation where the users see's the same result. Each of these ADTs has many implementations i.e. CDT. The container is a high-level ADT of above all ADTs.

Opposite of ADT is Concrete Data Type (CDT), where it contains an implementation of ADT.

**Real life example:**  
A book is abstract type (ADT) // Telephone Book is an implementation (CDT)

__Memory Managment__

Efficient use of memory is key to running many programs.
Each programming language has differing ways of dealing with memory managment:
	-Explicit memory management (eg C++/C with allocate and free)
		Can have problems with memory leaks
		Promotes use of efficient and rigourously typed code
	-Implicit Memory Managment (eg Java / Python / Functional programming with automated garbage collection)
		Argued to be less efficient / promotes more relaxed attitude to memory management
The runtime system of each language provides the respective memory management technique.

**ADTs in Java**

 A list in Java can be specified by `List<TYPE>` such as `List<int> or List<String>`. There are different implementations of lists, such as an array list or linked list.

We can declare and allocate a list, specifying the implementation we want with the code:
```
List<int> myArrayList = new ArrayList<int>();
List<int> myLinkedList = new LinkedList<int>();
```

**Constructors** initialize a new object. **Accessors** allow an external caller to obtain information about the state of an object.