In web attacks, there are two main sources of vulnerabilities: **input validation** and **application logic**. 
#### Authentication failure

Authenticating users after logging in can be achieved in a few ways. 

- Naively we might say that we accept any requests from the same IP address that a user logs in from, but NAT may cause several users to share the same IP, and DHCP may cause the same user to have different IPs.
- We could issue certificate, but this is complicated and we have the challenge of *who* to sign the certificate, which can be costly.
- The almost ubiquitous approach is to store tokens in cookies. 

Cookies let the server store a string on the client. They can be used to; identify the user, store username, preferences, etc.., track the user (time of last visit, etc..). A simple authentication scheme would have the backend compare the credentials (user/password) against whats stored in the database, and generate a cookie which is sent back to the user: `Set-Cookie: auth=secret`. On each request the client includes the session authenticator, and log in/out is recorded server side, so that if a user logs out, the session authenticator is now no longer valid.

We must maintain that every time we send a request it is over HTTPS (TLS), else an attacker could obtain this token. There are quite a few sites that have a HTTPS login, but fall back to HTTP after logging in - this is insecure. We can set the `secure` flag on the cookie, so it is only sent over secure connections: `Cookie secureCookie = new Cookie ("credential",c); secureCookie.setSecure(true);`

Another consideration for login systems is to maintain that sessions have a time limit, and that when the credentials are initially sent to the server the password is hashed. We must also maintain that sensitive data (bank details, medical records, etc.. ) are encrypted before transmission, and that sensitive data is not stored in clear text on the server.
#### SQL injection

SQL injection attacks are when a website provides access to a user to submit their own SQL queries, meaning that an attacker can have access to part of the database they are not permitted to. A very naive example of a SQL injection attack would be entering `’ OR ’1’=’1’ ) --`. 1=1 always returns true, so this returns all the items in the table. 

To avoid SQL injection we can use prepared statements  - which generally *escape* all special SQL characters. 
#### Cross-site scripting (XSS)

Web browser will execute anything the server sends to them - an attacked can force a website to send some malicious code. It's a type of input validation vulnerability, allowing the attacker to input malicious code, that another legitimate user can access, often without knowing. There are a few ways this code can be delivered to the victim. 

**Reflected XSS** is when the injected code is *reflected* off the web server - the injected code is not stored on the server. Only the user issuing the malicious request is affected. This can be used to run any script we want on the browser, potentially providing unintentional access to resources.

```php
## SERVER CODE
out.println("<h1>" + "Results for " + searchTerm + "</h1>");

## MALICIOUS INPUT
searchTerm = "<script>alert("pwnd")</script>"

## RESULTING HTML 
<h1> Results for <script>alert("pwnd")</script> </h1>
```

**Stored XSS** is when the injected code is persistent, and stored on the servers. Any user that accesses the resource can be affected. This can be inputted into something like a user post or profile - anywhere where the result of a user input form is accessible to other users.

JavaScript can access cookies and make remote connections - an XSS attack can be used to steal the cookie of anyone who looks at a page, and send the cookie to an attacker. The attacker can then use this cookie to log in as the victim. 

**XSS Phishing** is when an attacker injects a script that either provides a form that looks like a genuine login page, or redirects a user to a webpage that has the same look and feel of a legitimate login page, but instead is owned by the attacker. The fake login / page may ask the user for their credentials or other sensitive information.  

XSS can also be used to run any number of exploits against the user's browser or its plugins. The attacker can install malware on the victim's 
machine - often users become part of a botnet.

To prevent XSS we can sanitize all user inputs, but this is difficult. The type of sanitisation is context-dependant, JavaScript, HTML, CSS all have different keywords and escape characters. Sanitisation is also attack-dependant, depending on the context of the webpage / access to sensitive information.

`htmlspecialchars()` removes characters that cause problems in HTML: `&` becomes `&amp` for example, but this is not a catch-all solution. 
#### Cross-site request forgery

In a CSRF attack the following happens:
1. Victim is logs into a vulnerable website
2. Victim visits malicious page on a website owned by the attacker
3. Malicious content is delivered to victim
4. The victims browser sends a request to the vulnerable website

This can be used to get sensitive data, change settings on the vulnerable website, any request that the user can normally make can be performed.

A naïve (and incorrect) solution to prevent CSRF is to check the Referer header to see where the request comes from, BUT there are legitimate requests that may have no Referer header, like requests from proxies, or web application firewalls may remove it.

Another solution is to require a token (CSRF token) on every request, this is usually a 32 char nonce that changes each time. The server only accepts requests with a valid CSRF token. If the token is not regenerated each time a form is served, the application may be vulnerable to replay attacks.
#### Code injection

**XML External entities** - XML processors resolve an "external entity" during processing:
```XML
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="ISO-8859-1"?>
<!DOCTYPE foo [
<!ELEMENT foo ANY >
<!ENTITY xxe SYSTEM "file:///etc/passwd" >]>
<foo>&xxe;</foo>
```
The above code would print the etc/passwd file if the XML processor has root access. To prevent this sort of attack we need to sanitise all XML inputs from unknown sources, or simply reject all unknown XML.

**Broken Access Control / Path Traversal**
Query strings are used to tell dynamic webpages what to do:
```
http://myWebShop.com/index.php?account=tpc&action=add
http://myWebShop.com/index.php?account=tpc&action=show 
```

What if the attacker tries:
```
http://myWebShop.com/index.php?account=admin&action=delete

## OR 

http://nameOfHost/../../../etc/shadow
```

If the webserve is running with root permission they can access the shadow file. We can prevent this by limiting access control dependent on the user signed in, make a specific user account for the webserve, and only give that account access to public files, or making sure the webserve is not running as root.

Also, we should restrict access to:
- error messages
- directory listings (lists all files in a directory)
- admin panels

**Insecure Deserialization** is when the deserialization of user inputted data by the server is handled insecurely. This can allow an attacker to change field names, contents, change the format, and even perform RCE. We must make sure that we sanitize and validate inputs to prevent this.