A decision problem on words can be expressed in two ways:
	-as a function: f → {yes, no}
	-as a set of 'good' words

An informal definition: such a problem is decidable when there is a program / algorithm / effective procedure that can *decide* this problem.

A precise definition: such a problem is decidable when there is a turing machine that takes a word *w* on a blank tape, with the head in the leftmost position, and returns the correct answer, true or false. If there is such a machine, we say the problem is **decidable**. 

BUT a turing machine is quite a restrictive definition of a 'algorithm', so maybe we should be more liberal and allow two-tape turing machines, or two-dimensional turing machines. What about languages with infinitely many integer variables, and `for` loops, and `while` loops?

Many different notions of "algorithm" have been proposed that, at first sight, appear to be more expressive and powerful than a turing machine, but, so far as decision problems on words are concerned, they are no more expressive than a turing machine.

**Church’s thesis** states: “any decision problem on words that can be solved by an algorithm can be solved by a Turing machine”.
$
Another version is for functions $f$: $\Sigma^* \implies \Sigma^*$. In this case the turing machine must start with a word *w*, at the leftmost on an otherwise blank tape, and at the end of execution, must stop with the word $f(w)$. When there is such a machine, we say that $f$ is **computable**.

When Church's thesis talks about "words", many things other than words, like graphs, rational numbers, integer matrices, java programs, context free grammars, etc can all be encoded as words. There are some things that can't be encoded as words, like bitstreams, real numbers, functions, sets of natural numbers, etc, that CAN'T be encoded as words. 

**Primitive vs Basic Java**
Let us define primitive Java:
-nat is the only datatype
-we can create a variable nat i = 0 (zero only)
-increment a variable, i++
-decrement a variable, i-- (does nothing if i = 0)
-conditionals; if i = 0 {M} else {N}
-repetition a fixed number of times; repeat i times {M}

Some examples:

We can encode `nat j = i` as follows: 
`nat j = 0; `
`repeat i times {j++;}`

We can encode `j = 0` as follows: 
`repeat j times {j--;} `

We can encode` j = i` as follows: 
`j = 0; `
`repeat i times {j++;}`

We can encode `if i <= j {M} else {N}` as follows: 
`nat k = i; `
`repeat j times {k--;} `
`if k == 0 {M} else {N}`

We can encode `if i < j {M} else {N}` as `if j <= i {N} else {M}`. 

We can encode `if i == j {M} else {N}` as follows: 
`if i < j {N} else {if j < i {N} else {M}}`

What we **cannot** do with this "primitive Java" is **while loops**, or **recursion**. We extend primitive Java to include these features in "**Basic Java**", like `while i > 0 {M}`.

We can now encode hang as follows: 
`nat i = 0; i++;`
`while i > 0 { }`

With a k-ary program written in primitive Java, all inputs x $\in \mathbb{N}^k$ will terminate with an output, but in basic Java, we might not terminate - meaning **primitive Java** computes a **total function** from $\mathbb{N}^k \implies \mathbb{N}$, while **basic Java** might compute **partial functions**.

I.E. The following program returns an output of 2, if input is 0 or 1, but otherwise will hang:
`nat output=0; `
`nat j=0; `
`j++; `
`j++; `
`while (j > 0) { `
	`if (input0 <= j){`
		`j--; output++; } }`

We can translate between **Basic Java** and **Turing machines**, in such a way that the translation **preserves** the **meaning**: i.e., the translated program computes the same partial function as the original one. Thus, the **partial functions** that are **expressible in Java** are precisely the **computable ones**.
Any function that can be computed by a Primitive Java program is said to be **primitive recursive**.
The **primitive recursive functions** include all the familiar functions such as **comparison**, **multiplication**, **exponentiation**, **factorial** and so on. They also include **all** functions that can be computed in a Turing machine in polynomial time, exponential time and much more. So **we might think** that **primitive Java** can **compute all total computable functions**, but it **cannot**. One such total computable function that is not primitive recursive is the **Ackermann function**, defined as such:

$A(0, n) = n + 1$
$A(m + 1, 0) = A(m, 1)$
$A(m + 1, n + 1) = A(m, A(m + 1, n))$

Let us prove this always terminate (and such, is a total function):

For m, n ∈ N, let Q(m, n) be the statement that the evaluation of A(m, n) terminates. We prove ∀m ∈ N. ∀n ∈ N. Q(m, n) by induction. 
	• The base case says ∀n ∈ N. Q(0, n). It holds since A(0, n) returns n + 1. 
	• For the inductive step, we suppose ∀n ∈ N. Q(m, n) and want to prove ∀n ∈ N. Q(m+1, n). We do this by induction. 
		– The base case says Q(m + 1, 0). This holds because A(m, 1) returns a value p, by the outer inductive hypothesis i.e. Q(m, n), so A(m + 1, 0) also returns p. 
		– For the inductive step, we suppose Q(m + 1, n) and we want to prove Q(m + 1, n + 1). Then A(m+1, n) returns an answer p, by the inner inductive hypothesisi.e. Q(m+1, n), and A(m, p) returns a value q, by

The Ackermann function cannot be written in primitive Java, but it *can* be written in basic Java, by representing the stack of recursive calls as an extra parameter.

Church's thesis states that we cannot extend basic Java to express more partial functions from $\mathbb{N}^k$ to $\mathbb{N}$, and yet is still a programming language, i.e. the programs written in it can be computed algorithmically. Meaning that basic Java can express all computable total functions, and thus is said to be **Turing Complete**. Primitive Java is not Turing complete, as we have seen - it is however a **total** language, meaning that all programs terminate, unlike basic Java. We cannot have a language that is both **total** and **Turing complete**. 

**Examples of (Un)Decidable Properties**

-The problem of saying whether **two regexes** are **equivalent**. This is **decidable**.
-The problem of saying whether a given **CFG** **accepts a given word**. This is **decidable**.
-The problem of saying whether a given **CFG** accepts **any word** at all. This is **decidable**. 
-The problem of saying whether a given **CFG** accepts **every word** (for the alphabet Σ). This is **undecidable**. 
-The problem of saying whether a given **CFG** is **ambiguous**. This is **undecidable**. 
-The problem of saying whether a given **integer-coefficient polynomial** in **one** variable has a **rational solution**. This is **decidable**. 
-The problem of saying whether a given **integer-coefficient polynomial** in **several** variables has a rational solution. It is currently **unknown** whether this is decidable or not. 
-The problem of saying whether a given **integer-coefficient polynomial** in **several** variables has an **integer solution**. This is **undecidable**.
-The problem of saying whether a given **propositional formula** is **true** for all interpretations of the propositional atoms. (Such a formula is called a tautology.) This is **decidable**—just evaluate the formula for each assignment. 
-The problem of saying whether a given **first-order formula** is **true** for all interpretations of the predicate symbols. This is **undecidable**

**Semidecidable Properties**
A decision problem on words is said to be semidecidable when's there's a TM that takes a word *w* on a blank tape, and returns **true** if **true**, but **runs forever** if **false**. 

For example, "**integer-coefficient polynomial** in **several** variables has an **integer solution**", we said this was undecidable, but if we **find** the polynomial's integer solution, then it returns **true**, **otherwise** it will **run forever** - we can't say whether it's hanging or will eventually halt.

**Theorem**
Let **B** be a set of words. B is **decidable** if and only if, **B** is **semidecidable**, and  $\Sigma^*$ - B (set of words minus B // **B-complement**) is also **semidecidable**. 

**Proof**
Suppose B is semidecidable, there's a program P that decides it. P takes in a word w and returns true if 
w $\in$ B, and false if w $\notin$ B. We can modify this program to hang instead of returning false. This gives a semidecision procedure for B.
Furthermore, $\Sigma^*$ - B is also decidable, as we can modify the program to return true if P would return false, and false if P would return true. So $\Sigma^*$ - B is semidecidable.

Suppose B is semidecidable and $\Sigma^*$ - B is semidecidable. Let **P** be a semidecision procedure for **B** and **Q** be a semidecision procedure for $\Sigma^*$ - B. 
Given a word w:
	1.we can run P for one step, and if that returns, we return true.
	2.then we can run Q for one step, and if that returns, we return true, and otherwise go to step 1.