**Number and Sets**

**Natural Numbers: 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5..**
Used for counting and indexing. 
**Note** For indexing we often use the **inclusive** rule, use the total "counted" number of instances MINUS 1, as 0 is counted as an index. If using the **exclusive** rule then count as normal, including the last index.

EG
	A B C D E
	1  2 3 4 5
	D is inclusive 4th in the queue, and exclusive 3rd in the queue.

Cardinals are using for counting, whereas Ordinals are used for counting (1st, 2nd, 3rd).

**Bases**
Uniary EG SSSS0 is equal to 4 in base 10
To indicate different base, use the number with a subscript. 
Base 10 (Decary): 0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9
Base 2 (Binary): 0, 1
Base 8 (Octal): 0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7
Base 16 (Hex): 0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,A,B,C,D,E,F

**Operations**: Addition, Multiplication, Exponentiation
**Inveverse**: Subtraction
432 div 100 = 4
432 mod 100 = 32

**Equational Laws of Operations**
Addition is commutative (Order doesn't matter) and associative (Brackets don't matter)
EG a+b = b+a    AND    a + (b+c) = (a + b) +c
Multiplication is also commutative and associative, distributive (a * (b + c) = a*b + a*c), and also has a annihilating element (0 x a = 0).
You can use the equational laws as axioms to derive a large amount of logic.

**Converting between Bases**

To convert a binary (base 2) number to hectal (base 16), split the hex number into 4 (segments of 16).
110010101011 -> 1100 1010 1011
Convert these binary numbers to hectal
1100 = 12 / C, 1010 = 10 / A, 1011 = 11 / B
So the hectal conversion is CAB

To convert to octal use the same method but split into groups of 3 bits, as 3 bits contains 8 different values.


